docs: the plugin chapter (#1923)
sopel-irc/sopel: docs/source/plugin/anatomy.rst

===================
Anatomy of a plugin
===================

A Sopel plugin consists of a Python module containing one or more
``callable``\s. It may optionally also contain ``configure``, ``setup``, and
``shutdown`` hooks.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Defining rules
==============

The main goal of a Sopel plugin is to react to IRC messages. For that, Sopel
uses a :term:`Rule system`: plugins define rules, Sopel loads them and triggers
them when a message matches.

Sopel identifies a callable as a rule when it has been decorated with any of
these :mod:`sopel.plugin`'s decorators:

* :term:`Generic rule`:: :func:`~sopel.plugin.rule`,
  :func:`~sopel.plugin.find`, and :func:`~sopel.plugin.search`
* :term:`Named rule`: :func:`~sopel.plugin.commands`, 
  :func:`~sopel.plugin.action_commands`, and
  :func:`~sopel.plugin.nickname_commands`
* :term:`URL callback`: :func:`~sopel.plugin.url` and
  :func:`~sopel.plugin.url_lazy`

> Additionnaly, Sopel identifies a callable as a generic rule when these
> decorator are used alone:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, Sopel identifies a callable as a generic rule when these
decorators are used alone:
```

* event based rule: :func:`~sopel.plugin.event`
* intent/CTCP based rule: :func:`~sopel.plugin.intent`

In that case, it will use a match-all regex (`r'.*'`)::

   from sopel import plugin

   @plugin.event('JOIN')
   def on_join_2(bot, trigger):
      pass

   # this is equivalent to this:
   @plugin.rule(r'.*')
   @plugin.event('JOIN')
   def on_join(bot, trigger):
      pass

> Channel vs Private message
> --------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Channel vs. private messages
----------------------------
```

I interpret this as `(Channel vs. private) messages`, but am totally open to feedback if it seems more ambiguous than I think.

Author: I didn't know how to word that properly, so your suggestion rules.

By default, :term:`rules <Rule>` can be triggered from a channel or a private
message. It is possible to limit that to either one of these options:

* channel only: :func:`sopel.plugin.require_chanmsg`
* private message only: :func:`sopel.plugin.require_privmsg`

Access right requirements
-------------------------

By default anyone can trigger a :term:`rule <Rule>`, and for some it might be
better to limit who can trigger them. There are decorators for that:

* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_account`: requires services/NickServ

>   authentication; works only of the server implement authentication properly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  authentication; works only if the server implements modern IRC authentication
```

It's not "properly" per se. Just a newer standard that older networks usually don't support.

Author: I reused some part of the decorator's docstring for that.

* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_privilege`: requires a specific level of
  privileges in the channel; works only for channel messages, not private

>   messages, and it should be used with :func:`~sopel.plugin.require_chanmsg`

Reviewer: This makes me think that we should perhaps consider making `require_privilege` imply `require_chanmsg` without forcing the plugin dev to specify both. Separate PR, of course, but the idea is what's important here.

Author: Probably yes.

Reviewer: Just to follow up, it's already documented as ignored in PMs: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/blob/9189ad01f064987d507938352e1e59bd3cbf128a/sopel/plugin.py#L804

New idea sans wrapping, because I'm short on time:

```suggestion
  messages, and you probably want to use it with :func:`~sopel.plugin.require_chanmsg`
```

* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_admin`: only the bot's owner and its admins can
  trigger the rule
* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_owner`: only the bot's owner can trigger the rule

Rate limiting
-------------

All :term:`rules <Rule>` can have rate limiting with the
:func:`sopel.plugin.rate` decorator. Rate limiting means how often a rule can
be triggered. This is different from the flood protection logic, which is how
often Sopel can send messages to the network. By default, a rule doesn't have
any rate limiting.

> There are 3 type of rate limiting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three types of rate limiting:
```

Blah blah style manuals blah blah numbers less than ten.

* per-user: how often a rule triggers for each user
* per-channel: how often a rule triggers for a given channel
* globally: how often a rule triggers accross the whole network

Example::

   from sopel import plugin

   @plugin.rule(r'Ah[!?.]?')
   @plugin.rate(user=2)
   def you_said_ah(bot, trigger):
      bot.reply('Ha AH!')

> Rule label
> ----------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rule labels
-----------
```

A rule has a label: it will be used for logging, documentation, and internal
manipulation. There are two cases to consider:

* :term:`Generic rules <Generic rule>` and :term:`URL callbacks <URL callback>`
  use their :term:`callable <Plugin callable>`'s name by default (i.e. the

>   function's ``__name__``). This can be overriden with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  function's ``__name__``). This can be overridden with the
```

  :func:`sopel.plugin.label` decorator.
* A :term:`Named rule` is already named (by definition), so it uses its name

>   directly as rule label. This can't be overriden by a decorator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  directly as rule label. This can't be overridden by a decorator.
```

This label is particulary useful for bot owners who want to disable a rule in
a specific channel. In the following example, the ``say_hello`` rule from the

> ``hello`` plugin is disable in the ``#rude`` channel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``hello`` plugin is disabled in the ``#rude`` channel:
```

.. code-block:: ini

   [#rude]
   disable_commands = {'hello': ['say_hello']}

> The rule in question is defined by the ``hello`` plugin like that::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rule in question is defined by the ``hello`` plugin like so::
```

Colloquial usage > perfect grammar

   @plugin.rule(r'hello!?', r'hi!?', r'hey!?')
   @plugin.label('say_hello')
   def handler_hello(bot, trigger):
      bot.reply('Ha AH!')

Plugin callables
================

When a message from the IRC server matches a :term:`Rule`, Sopel will execute
its attached :term:`callable <Plugin callable>`. All plugin callables follow
the same interface:

.. py:function:: plugin_callable(bot, trigger)

>    :param bot: the bot's instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :param bot: wrapped bot instance
```

   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.SopelWrapper`
   :param trigger: the object that triggered the call
   :type trigger: :class:`sopel.trigger.Trigger`

A callable must accept two positional arguments: a
:class:`bot <sopel.bot.SopelWrapper>` object, and a
:class:`trigger <sopel.trigger.Trigger>` object. Both are objects tied to the
message that matches the rule.

The ``bot`` provides the ability to send messages to the network (to say

> something or to send a specific command such as ``join``), and to check the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
something or to send a specific command such as ``JOIN``), and to check the
```

IRC commands are UPPERCASE.

state of the bot such as its settings, memory, or database. It is a context
aware wrapper around the :class:`~sopel.bot.Sopel` instance.

The ``trigger`` provides information about the line which triggered the rule
and this callable to be executed.

> The return value of a callable is ignored  unless it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The return value of a callable is ignored unless it is
```

:const:`sopel.plugin.NOLIMIT`, in which case
:term:`rate limiting <Rate limiting>` will not be applied for that call.

> (see :func:`sopel.plugin.rate`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(See :func:`sopel.plugin.rate`.)
```

.. note::

   Note that the name can, and should, be anything, and it doesn't have to be

>    called ``plugin_callable``. At least, it should not be called ``callable``
>    as it is a :func:`Python built-in function <callable>`::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   called ``plugin_callable``. At least, it should not be called ``callable``,
   since that is a :func:`Python built-in function <callable>`::
```

      from sopel import plugin

      @plugin.commands('hello')
      def say_hello(bot, trigger):
         """Reply hello to you."""
         bot.reply('Hello!')

Plugin jobs
===========

Another feature available to plugins is the ability to define

> :term:`Plugin job`. It is a Python callable decorated with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:term:`Plugin job`\s. It is a Python callable decorated with
```

Does this work? I didn't test. 🙊

Author: I found a way.

:func:`sopel.plugin.interval` and that executes every period of time.

A job follows this interface:

.. py:function:: plugin_job(bot)

>    :param bot: the bot's instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :param bot: the bot instance
```

   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel`

.. note::

   Note that the name can be anything, and it doesn't have to be called
   ``plugin_job``::

      from sopel import plugin

      @plugin.interval(5)
      def spam_every_5s(bot):
          if "#here" in bot.channels:
              bot.say("It has been five seconds!", "#here")

.. important::

   A job may execute while the ``bot`` is **not** connected, and it must not
   assume any network access.

Plugin setup & shutdown
=======================

When loading and unloading plugins, a plugin can perform setup and shutdown
actions. For that purpose, a plugin can define optional functions named
``setup`` and ``shutdown``. There can be one and only one function with each
name for a plugin.

Setup
-----

The ``setup`` function must follow this interface:

.. py:function:: setup(bot)

>    :param bot: the bot's instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :param bot: the bot instance
```

   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel`

This function is optional. If it exists, it will be called while the plugin is
being loaded. The purpose of this function is to perform whatever actions are
needed to allow a plugin to function properly (e.g, ensuring that the
appropriate configuration variables exist and are set). Note that this normally
occurs prior to connection to the server, so the behavior of the messaging
functions on the :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel` object it's passed is undefined and

> is likely to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they are likely to fail.
```

I think this is a copy-paste of old text, but let's fix it anyway.

Throwing an exception from this function will stop Sopel from loading the
plugin, and none of its :term:`rules <Rule>` or :term:`jobs <Plugin job>` will
be registered. The exception will be caught, an error message logged, and Sopel
will try to load the next plugin.

This is useful when requiring the presence of configuration values (by raising
a :exc:`~sopel.config.ConfigurationError` error) or making other environmental

> requirements (dependencies, folder, access right, and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements (dependencies, file/folder access rights, and so on).
```

The bot will not continue loading plugins or connecting during the execution of
this function. As such, an infinite loop (such as an unthreaded polling loop)
will cause the bot to hang.

Shutdown
--------

The ``shutdown`` function must follow this interface:

.. py:function:: shutdown(bot)

>    :param bot: the bot's instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :param bot: the bot instance
```

   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel`

This function is optional. If it exists, it will be called while the bot

> is shuting down. Note that this normally occurs after closing connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is shutting down. Note that this normally occurs after closing connection
```

to the server, so the behavior of the messaging functions on the

> :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel` object it's passed is undefined and is likely to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:class:`sopel.bot.Sopel` object it's passed is undefined and they are likely to fail.
```

I sense this might cause an orphan line, but oh well.

The purpose of this function is to perform whatever actions are needed to allow

> a plugin to properly clean up (e.g, ensuring that any temporary cache files are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a plugin to properly clean up (e.g. ensuring that any temporary cache files are
```

deleted).

The bot will not continue notifying other plugins or continue quitting during
the execution of this function. As such, an infinite loop (such as an
unthreaded polling loop) will cause the bot to hang.

.. versionadded:: 4.1

Plugin configuration
====================

A plugin can define and use a configuration section. By subclassing
:class:`sopel.config.types.StaticSection`, it can define the options it uses

> and may requires. Then, it should add this section to the bot's settings::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and may require. Then, it should add this section to the bot's settings::
```

   from sopel.config import types

   class FooSection(types.StaticSection):
       bar = types.ListAttribute('bar')
       fizz = ValidatedAttribute('fizz', bool, default=False)

   def setup(bot):
      bot.settings.define_section('foo', FooSection)

> This will allow the bot to properly loads this part of the configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will allow the bot to properly load this part of the configuration file:
```

.. code-block:: ini

   [foo]
   bar =
      spam
      eggs
      bacon
   fizz = yes

.. seealso::

   The :meth:`~sopel.config.Config.define_section` method to define a new
   section so the bot can parse it properly.

Configuration wizard
--------------------

> When the owner setups the bot, Sopel provides a configuration wizard. When a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the owner sets up the bot, Sopel provides a configuration wizard. When a
```

plugin defines a ``configure`` function, the user will be asked if they want
to configure said plugin, and if yes, this function will execute.

The ``configure`` function must follow this interface:

.. py:function:: configure(settings)

   :param settings: the bot's configuration object
   :type settings: :class:`sopel.config.Config`

> It's intended purpose is to use the methods of the passed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its intended purpose is to use the methods of the passed
```

:class:`sopel.config.Config` object in order to create the configuration
variables it needs to function properly.

.. versionadded:: 3.0

Example::

   def configure(config):
      config.define_section('foo', FooSection)
      config.foo.configure_setting('bar', 'What do you want?')
      config.foo.configure_setting('fizz', 'Do you fizz?')

.. note::

>    The ``configure`` function is called only from the command line, and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The ``configure`` function is called only from the command line, and
```

===================
Anatomy of a plugin
===================

A Sopel plugin consists of a Python module containing one or more
``callable``\s. It may optionally also contain ``configure``, ``setup``, and
``shutdown`` hooks.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Defining rules
==============

The main goal of a Sopel plugin is to react to IRC messages. For that, Sopel
uses a :term:`Rule system`: plugins define rules, Sopel loads them and triggers
them when a message matches.

Sopel identifies a callable as a rule when it has been decorated with any of
these :mod:`sopel.plugin`'s decorators:

> * :term:`Generic rule`:: :func:`~sopel.plugin.rule`,

Author: :exclamation:

* :term:`URL callback`: :func:`~sopel.plugin.url` and
  :func:`~sopel.plugin.url_lazy`

Additionally, Sopel identifies a callable as a generic rule when these
decorators are used alone:

* event based rule: :func:`~sopel.plugin.event`
* intent/CTCP based rule: :func:`~sopel.plugin.intent`

In that case, it will use a match-all regex (``r'.*'``)::

   from sopel import plugin

   @plugin.event('JOIN')
   def on_join_2(bot, trigger):
      pass

   # this is equivalent to this:
   @plugin.rule(r'.*')
   @plugin.event('JOIN')
   def on_join(bot, trigger):
      pass

Channel vs. private messages
----------------------------

By default, :term:`rules <Rule>` can be triggered from a channel or a private
message. It is possible to limit that to either one of these options:

* channel only: :func:`sopel.plugin.require_chanmsg`
* private message only: :func:`sopel.plugin.require_privmsg`

Access right requirements
-------------------------

By default anyone can trigger a :term:`rule <Rule>`, and for some it might be
better to limit who can trigger them. There are decorators for that:

* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_account`: requires services/NickServ

>   authentication; works only if the server implements modern IRC authentication

Author: You're totally right!

* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_privilege`: requires a specific level of
  privileges in the channel; works only for channel messages, not private
  messages, and you probably want to use it with
  :func:`~sopel.plugin.require_chanmsg`
* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_admin`: only the bot's owner and its admins can
  trigger the rule
* :func:`sopel.plugin.require_owner`: only the bot's owner can trigger the rule

Rate limiting
-------------

All :term:`rules <Rule>` can have rate limiting with the
:func:`sopel.plugin.rate` decorator. Rate limiting means how often a rule can
be triggered. This is different from the flood protection logic, which is how
often Sopel can send messages to the network. By default, a rule doesn't have
any rate limiting.

There are three types of rate limiting:

* per-user: how often a rule triggers for each user
* per-channel: how often a rule triggers for a given channel
* globally: how often a rule triggers accross the whole network

Example::

   from sopel import plugin

   @plugin.rule(r'Ah[!?.]?')
   @plugin.rate(user=2)
   def you_said_ah(bot, trigger):

>       bot.reply('Ha AH!')

Author: Good point!

  directly as rule label. This can't be overridden by a decorator.

This label is particulary useful for bot owners who want to disable a rule in
a specific channel. In the following example, the ``say_hello`` rule from the
``hello`` plugin is disabled in the ``#rude`` channel:

.. code-block:: ini

   [#rude]
   disable_commands = {'hello': ['say_hello']}

The rule in question is defined by the ``hello`` plugin like so::

   @plugin.rule(r'hello!?', r'hi!?', r'hey!?')
   @plugin.label('say_hello')
   def handler_hello(bot, trigger):
      bot.reply('Ha AH!')

Plugin callables
================

When a message from the IRC server matches a :term:`Rule`, Sopel will execute
its attached :term:`callable <Plugin callable>`. All plugin callables follow
the same interface:

.. py:function:: plugin_callable(bot, trigger)

   :param bot: wrapped bot instance
   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.SopelWrapper`
   :param trigger: the object that triggered the call
   :type trigger: :class:`sopel.trigger.Trigger`

A callable must accept two positional arguments: a
:class:`bot <sopel.bot.SopelWrapper>` object, and a
:class:`trigger <sopel.trigger.Trigger>` object. Both are objects tied to the

> message that matches the rule.

Author: "exact" doesn't speak to me.

plugin, and none of its :term:`rules <Rule>` or :term:`jobs <Plugin job>` will
be registered. The exception will be caught, an error message logged, and Sopel
will try to load the next plugin.

This is useful when requiring the presence of configuration values (by raising
a :exc:`~sopel.config.ConfigurationError` error) or making other environmental
requirements (dependencies, file/folder access rights, and so on).

The bot will not continue loading plugins or connecting during the execution of
this function. As such, an infinite loop (such as an unthreaded polling loop)
will cause the bot to hang.

Shutdown
--------

The ``shutdown`` function must follow this interface:

.. py:function:: shutdown(bot)

   :param bot: the bot instance
   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel`

This function is optional. If it exists, it will be called while the bot
is shutting down. Note that this normally occurs after closing connection
to the server, so the behavior of the messaging functions on the
:class:`bot <sopel.bot.Sopel>` object it's passed is undefined and they are
likely to fail.

The purpose of this function is to perform whatever actions are needed to allow

> a plugin to properly clean up (e.g. ensuring that any temporary cache files are
> deleted).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a plugin to properly clean up after itself (e.g. ensuring that any temporary
cache files are deleted).
```

   from sopel.config import types

   class FooSection(types.StaticSection):
       bar = types.ListAttribute('bar')
       fizz = types.ValidatedAttribute('fizz', bool, default=False)

   def setup(bot):
      bot.settings.define_section('foo', FooSection)

This will allow the bot to properly load this part of the configuration file:

.. code-block:: ini

   [foo]
   bar =
      spam
      eggs
      bacon
   fizz = yes

.. seealso::

   The :meth:`~sopel.config.Config.define_section` method to define a new
   section so the bot can parse it properly.

Configuration wizard
--------------------

When the owner sets up the bot, Sopel provides a configuration wizard. When a
plugin defines a ``configure`` function, the user will be asked if they want
to configure said plugin, and if yes, this function will execute.

The ``configure`` function must follow this interface:

.. py:function:: configure(settings)

   :param settings: the bot's configuration object
   :type settings: :class:`sopel.config.Config`

Its intended purpose is to use the methods of the passed
:class:`sopel.config.Config` object in order to create the configuration

> variables it needs to function properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variables it needs to work properly.
```

.. py:function:: shutdown(bot)

   :param bot: the bot instance
   :type bot: :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel`

This function is optional. If it exists, it will be called while the bot
is shutting down. Note that this normally occurs after closing connection
to the server, so the behavior of the messaging functions on the

> :class:`sopel.bot.Sopel` object it's passed is undefined and they are likely to fail.

Reviewer: Well, my suggestion here didn't cause an orphan line, but that's because you just applied the suggestion and didn't re-wrap. 😁

Author: I'll, eventually. 😏
